In 1939. the Nationalists
win the Spanish Civil War.
The Spanish Republicans living
in the Soviet Union become stateless.
They are trainee pilots.
sailors in transit.
exiled children of war.
The USSR takes in the Republicans.
but won't let them leave.
They visit embassies. They try to escape.
In a climate of war and paranoia.
they are accused of treason.
condemned without trial…
and sent to work camps.
WINTER 1941
KAZAKHSTAN
SPASSK-99 WORK CAMP
Move! Come on!
Women to the left!
Men to the right! Make it quick!
Come on!
-Move forward! Come on!
-Faster!
Don't stand in the way! Keep moving!
Move! Keep walking! Come on!
Move! Use your legs!
Women to the left! Men to the right!
Make it quick!
-Come on!
-Come on! Move faster!
Women to the left!
Men to the right! I said make it quick!
Come on! Faster!
Come on!
Keep moving!
Come on! Faster!
Get in here! Inside!
Get in a line! Make it quick. you hear me?
Take off your clothes!
Take off your clothes.
Get back. Clothes off.
Take it off! Clothes off!
Belongings on the table!
What you got there?
Take it off!
Belongings on the table!
Take off you clothes.
Do it now!
No eye contact!
What don't you understand? Take it off!
Place it on the table! Put it here!
Faster!
Take it all off!
All of it! Everything on the table!
Come on!
Closer!
Over there! Come on!
Number 289. Telmo Reyes.
Move! Come on! Go!
Number 297. José Muñoz.
Over there! Come on!
Number 295. Julio Hermida.
-Come on. Move.
-Number 290. Eladio Junqueras.
Come on!
Get a move on. Come on.
Number 291. Melléin Palau.
What are you waiting for? Move!
Come on!
Welcome. Spaniards.
There are empty beds
in the back. Take your pick.
But most importantly. be quiet.
Captain?
Find a spot.
Do you know what five guys.
one from Salamanca.
one from Asturias.
one from Andalusia.
one from Galicia. one from Catalonia.
all have in common with a flock of sheep?
They all end up in the same pen.
It's a good one. right?
Seriously. Barcelonian?
My God.
You ought to go sleep now. Go to sleep.
Get up! Rise and shine!
-Stop lazing around! Get up!
-Everybody up!
-Quickly! Get up!
-Line up in rows of five! I said quickly!
Quickly!
What are you waiting for.
a formal invitation? Up! Quickly!
Come on!
Stop staring!
Move! Keep moving!
Come on! Get down! Faster!
I said move faster! Quickly!
Line up outside! Quickly!
Faster! Move!
Move faster!
Go faster!
-Quickly!
-Get in here! Wash time! Run faster!
-Move faster!
-Wash time! Come on!
Yeah! Get in there!
Over here! Quickly! Come on!
Come on! Double-time! Faster!
Over there!
There! Faster!
Faster!
-In line! On the double!
-Faster!
Get up there!
Faster!
Keep up with the rest! Faster!
Get in there!
Faster! Don't bunch up!
Why so slow? Faster!
Run! Faster!
Come on! Faster!
Over here! Follow the brigade leader!
This way. Come on.
Here. Get in the line.
Faster!
The mining work schedule
is from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
The two-hour trip each way isn't included.
Refusing to do one's duty
will result in punishment.
Breaking formation will be punished.
Each brigade is required
to meet the quota.
You eat as much as you dig out.
Each group must stay
with their brigade leader.
Number 73!
Number 57!
Smuggling tobacco
is grounds for punishment
in the form
of spending one week in the pit.
Disregard! As you were!
Falling out of line
is considered an escape attempt!
-Get up. damn it! Get the fuck up!
-I said to disregard!
Come on.
This is your place of work now.
Start getting used to it.
Make yourselves at home.
And just like I already told you…
the rules here are simple.
No quota means no food.
Careful there.
One cartload…
from each person.
Just like I told you.
Everyone got that?
Hey! You sleeping or what?
Now. listen to me.
Groups one and two go to Nikolay.
Groups three and four.
follow me. for fuck's sake.
Understood?
You're gonna stand here forever?
Are you going to help?
For fuck's sake.
What a partner I got stuck with.
Take the stones. Grab the stones.
-I'm on it.
-Barcelonian!
-Fucking hell.
It's just I'm not feeling well.
Barcelonian!
Get back! Get back to work!
-Please let me out! Please!
-Get back!
-Please!
-Let me out. please!
-I told you to get back!
-Stop this!
-Get back! Quickly!
Everything's okay! It's all good!
Thank you!
Calm down!
-I can't breathe. Eladio. Eladio…
-Calm down!
-I don't want to die here. Eladio.
-It's all in your head.
You can breathe.
-Eladio. I don't want to die here. Eladio…
-You can breathe. You can.
Look at me.
Look me in the eye. goddamn it!
I don't want…
Take a breath.
Breathe. Come on.
Breathe in.
Let it out.
Breathe with me. With me.
Breathe in. Let it out.
Better?
Come on! Move faster!
What are you standing there for? Move!
Don't hold up the rest! Move up!
Quick! Faster!
Why are you just standing there?
Move! Let's go!
Come on! Get a move on! Faster!
Move!
Move! Come on!
Come on! Get a move on! Don't slow down!
Come on! Faster!
Come with me.
Come on.
Help me get him out of the pit.
Here.
I'm Hans Müller.
What can I do for you. my friend?
Are you a trader?
Maybe. Why?
I need paper and ink.
Three half-rations.
Wait.
How can I speak with the camp chief?
Are you serious?
Do you see that guy in the back?
He's the supervisor. Talk to him.
He's the translator
and the chief's secretary.
If anyone can introduce you. it's him.
Why are you talking to that Boche?
Are you friends with Nazis now?
Faster. One at a time.
In rows of two!
Faster!
Keep up the pace! Walk forward!
Don't stop.
Faster.
Spaniards!
What are you standing there for? Hurry up.
Come on! Put it here.
Okay.
Come on. Hermida.
Wedge.
-Hey. Julio.
-Huh?
You still here or what?
Pass me the wedge. Come on.
What the fuck is taking so long?
If this comes down.
we're all fucked! Come on!
Yes. We're on it.
-Chief.
-Mmm?
This is Telmo Reyes Aguirre.
a Spanish Republican captain.
He wants to request a review of his trial.
And why would they reconsider
a final verdict regarding treason?
The system does not make mistakes.
Because there was no treason.
And there wasn't any trial.
Our only crime was wanting
to return home to our families.
To Spain?
You would've been executed on the spot.
The war has ended there.
For fuck's sake.
Wars never end.
-We were looking for a way out.
-And so you visited the German embassy.
We visited many embassies.
Which is indicative of treason.
With all due respect. Chief.
you divided up Poland with them.
We only wanted to go back to our families.
The Soviet Union is your only family.
Wanting to leave the USSR
is an act of treachery. Is that clear?
Chief.
the Spaniards are exceeding the plan
in the coal mine.
They're bringing in
twice the prescribed quota.
If you take it upon yourself
to send my request.
I'll make sure
to defend myself during the trial.
We just want a fair trial. comrade.
How did you address me just now?
You are an enemy of the people.
accused of treason under Article 58.
You are forbidden
to address me in such a way.
You're no comrade of mine. Not even close.
Such an affront may be punished severely.
You can go.
That's your son in that photo. isn't it?
He's been called to the front.
Captain…
I speak Russian.
as I'm a senior captain
from the Kirovabad flight school.
That plane is a Tu-2.
It's a medium bomber.
If they entrusted it to your son.
you know you can be proud of him.
Thank you.
One second. Captain.
Nazarov gave me his word.
He'll send my letters for review.
-Really?
-Yes.
Seriously?
What the hell do I care what Nazarov says?
I only care about what you say.
What do you think. Captain?
I give you my word.
We're getting out of here. Barcelonian.
SPRING 1943
TWO YEARS LATER
-Move faster!
-Come on. you bastards!
Faster!
Move!
That way!
That way! Straight ahead!
Come on!
Move!
Faster!
New faces arrive every day.
It seems that Germany is losing the war.
Fascist motherfuckers.
Shit!
Look. A Spanish flag.
-I don't believe it.
-Yep. They're Spaniards!
Jesus Christ.
Fascist scum has arrived at the camp!
Long live Spain!
Long live what?
That's for being a smart-ass.
Any Galicians?
Me! From Noia!
For fuck's sake.
Muros!
Who cares if they're Galicians?
They're fucking fascists. Hermida.
I don't get you.
Shit. Eladio. I'm not sure
the captain will like this.
I don't care about the captain.
What won't I like?
Fascists. Captain.
Scum from the Blue Division.
-One is from Noia. Even worse.
-You're obsessed with Galicians.
Come on. kids! Get inside!
-Come on! Move!
-Faster!
That way! Straight ahead!
Move faster!
-Come on! Move!
-Move!
Undergarments on the table!
Take off your Nazi clothes!
Do it now. I said! Take it off!
Do it now! I said take it off now!
What's not to understand?
Quickly!
Take off your clothes!
Faster! Come on! Quickly!
Can you be any slower?!
Faster!
I said faster!
Come on! Take it all off
and put it on the table!
Quickly!
Take everything off!
Come on! I said quickly!
Belongings on the table!
Faster! Keep going!
Take off your clothes!
Faster!
Take it all off!
Find yourselves some empty beds.
And don't even try to come out until dawn!
Everyone shits in the same bucket.
What is this. Lieutenant?
Communism.
What do we do?
We need to rest.
We'll organize tomorrow.
Find a place.
-Shit.
-The hell are you doing. you fuck?
-What the shit was that?
-I was trying…
-I'm sorry. I was…
-Fuck me! What a shitty tattoo.
-That's just…
-I just… Don't!
Don't worry.
Don't look at them. Father.
That kid is Spanish.
He may be. but he's with the urkas.
They're murderers. Father.
Stop looking at them. goddamn it.
If he's with them.
he's already chosen sides.
Each time you move forward
into a new tunnel.
you grab a pickaxe
and give the ceiling a few taps.
As long as it doesn't sound hollow.
you're good to go.
-And if it does sound hollow?
-If it does. you're not good to go.
The yield depends on the tunnel.
Some tunnels are 20 tons a week.
others are 30.
This one here is 60.
Pretty lucky. huh?
"Lucky." he says.
German Nazis. go to Dimitrov.
Spanish Nazis. come with me.
Come on. Hurry up. Let's go!
Stop staring at it.
Eat.
Number 321!
3-2-1. for fuck's sake.
-Come on! Let's go. fucker!
-Hey!
-Move!
Faster. you fuck!
Why are you so fucking slow?
In winter. you can't eat outside.
The soup freezes.
I'm Telmo Reyes.
Spanish Republican Army captain.
Where's your military courtesy?
Military courtesy?
This is a show of power. Pathetic.
This isn't a prisoner camp.
You are the enemy here.
You'll be better off if you just eat.
sleep. and not think too much.
Is that a threat?
It's advice.
No offense. Captain.
but I don't usually take advice
from a communist.
Move! Come on!
Move! Don't slow down!
Move! Move faster! Come on!
Come on! On the left!
Move! Keep going forward! Come on!
Faster! Don't just stand there! Come on!
Move!
Come on! Move!
Come on! Faster!
Don't stop!
Move! Come on!
-Father!
-Grab him there. What happened?
-Careful.
Who did this to you. Father?
Okay. Sit him down here. Careful.
Okay. Sit down. Watch your head.
There you go.
Okay. Let me see.
You're okay. Breathe. Okay?
Count to three.
One…
-It's okay. Breathe. Relax.
-It's over.
You're still doing that?
Those letters
won't get us out of here. Captain.
No one's blaming you. okay?
No one's blaming you.
-The law is on our side.
-"The law."
The law is one thing.
but justice is something else entirely.
We've been here for two years. Telmo.
Why don't you stop?
Do you know what Aristotle said?
"When men are friends.
they have no need of justice."
That Aristotle guy
wouldn't last a day in this camp.
How long are you gonna make my men pay
for your defeatist complex?
We've put up with humiliation
in the mine. the ration cuts.
but I refuse to let any of my men
be assaulted again.
especially not a priest.
-What's he talking about?
-No idea.
He must have tripped.
Control your flock. Reyes.
No offense.
but I don't usually take advice
from a fascist.
It's not advice.
It's a threat.
Fucking Palau.
Don't forget your place. miner.
What?
-Come on. Take it.
-Don't bullshit me.
-Take all of it.
-Come on. Take it.
Here's one.
And another one.
He learned to count.
Here's another one. And another.
Here you go.
Here's a ten.
Come on. Turn 'em up.
Come on. Take it.
A nine.
Don't have it.
Take that.
-Have two more.
-Don't bullshit me.
Come on. Show us
what you've been holding onto.
Wait. Let me.
-A ten. Here's a ten.
-Shut up!
-A jack. Another jack.
-Another ten.
-Give me another.
-What?
Take it. already. Come on.
-Take all of it.
-Come on. Take it.
And another one.
Do you understand me?
You understand me. right?
No. look. It's very easy.
I need to make a deal with them.
I need you to translate for me.
Can you understand me? Huh?
Do you speak Spanish?
I know you speak Spanish.
Can you understand me?
You and me with them…
Translate!
A deal!
Right now!
Come on! Please!
Plea…
He wants to make a deal.
Like aguardiente. Queimada.
Do you know what queimada is?
-No. but I do know what aguardiente is.
-Queimada is like a…
Where are you going?
Outside. We've finished.
-You finished work?
-Yes. we finished.
Look at the brave Galician.
My men have finished their shift.
Are you sure?
Positive. I'll go with you.
I don't think so.
Go back inside.
Come on. tough guy.
-Get back inside.
-Look at him.
Knight in shining armor.
What are you waiting for?
What are you fucking waiting for?
Get back. you fuckers!
Come on! Let's go!
What are you waiting for?!
On your knees. Come on.
Very good.
Now. say after me.
Arise. ye workers from your slumber
Arise. ye prisoners of want
For reason in revolt now thunders
And at last ends the age of cant
Take it out on me. Junqueras!
Leaving three corpses isn't a good idea.
Don't bother. Lieutenant.
These people only understand pain.
You want to talk about pain? Huh?
May 14.
1937.
Llanes.
Franco's soldiers enter the town.
They rape all the women.
Old women and young girls.
My wife
and my daughter included.
My little girl was only six years old.
Motherfuckers!
Casares.
July 19. 1936.
The Republican police
kill the town's priest and doctor.
The town's doctor was my father.
One less.
Son of a bitch!
Calm down. Get down.
Get down and don't move. Get down.
Goddamn it.
You started the war.
Yes. And you lost it.
When will you realize that.
in this camp. the Republic won the war?
Sing one verse.
Just one and I'll let you leave.
Come on.
Sing.
Facing the sun with a new shirt--
You fucking son of a bitch!
-Who do you think you're talking to?
-That you embroidered in red--
Go on. Come on. Sing now.
Sing now! Sing now. scum!
Sing your anthem now!
Sing now. scum!
Sing now. you fascist piece of shit!
Sing your anthem now!
-Arise. ye workers from your slumbers
-Sing your anthem now! Sing!
-Arise. ye prisoners of want
-Sing!
-For reason in revolt now thunders
-And at last ends the age of cant
That's enough.
That's enough. Dimitrov.
No.
That's enough.
My family…
was from Leningrad.
This one stays.
I won't leave without my lieutenant.
-Do as he says.
-I'm not leaving you alone.
That's an order!
Do something. damn it! They'll kill him!
-Shut up! Get out. Galician! Out!
-They'll kill him!
-Both of you. out!
-We're all Spaniards. goddamn it!
We're all Spaniards!
Get down on the ground! Quick!
Do it faster!
Down on the ground!
Stay still!
Down! Face down!
Don't move!
-Face down!
-Come on!
Hurry up!
Pick up the pace!
What are you waiting for? Keep moving!
Come on! Move! Faster! I said faster!
Stay still!
Don't move!
-Face down!
-Come on!
My little girl was only six years old.
Motherfuckers!
My little girl was only six years old…
No.
Please. I beg you.
Take it off.
Leave him alone. He's protected.
Stand up.
Chief.
I'm Lieutenant Salgado. 250th division.
second regiment. first battalion.
Since we arrived at this camp.
we have been treated like common prisoners
and put in the same barracks
with murderers and rapists.
I would like my men and I to be treated
in accordance with the Geneva Convention.
The Germans are at war
with the Soviet Union. You are not.
You came here
to kill civilians for no reason.
thousands of kilometers from your home.
You are mercenaries.
You are worse than rats.
Who gave you these injuries?
It was a great gesture
not to betray your compatriots.
Now is not the time for drawings.
There is a lot of sadness
in your drawings.
But there is also beauty in this world.
If you know where to look.
Don't stop drawing. Lieutenant.
Are you friends with murderers now?
That man didn't kill your husband.
If it wasn't him. it was someone like him.
WINTER 1944
Lieutenant.
Forgive me.
-How are you?
-I'm fine.
-We thought…
-Welcome. Lieutenant.
-Thanks. Artigas.
-We thought--
I told you.
Manuel.
This is Pablito.
Pablo.
Father made a deal with the urkas.
Father is speaking out of fear.
I'm speaking out of caution.
We could all end up dead.
But we won't if we stay here. Father?
Don't you remember
what they did to you and the lieutenant?
Manuel is right. No one's ever escaped
from a camp like this. Never.
Lieutenant. I hate to contradict you.
The Italians tried. but they backed out.
They didn't succeed.
If someone escapes.
the whole barracks is punished.
Father. do you know what this is? Do you?
I keep this to remember what we are.
We are soldiers. goddamn it.
It's our duty to try.
How many kilometers away
do you think the nearest town is?
How many provisions would we need
to not die of hunger or thirst?
Which direction would you head?
Where do you think north. south.
east. and west are from here? Where?
There are hundreds of kilometers
of wasteland out there.
Well. I do know.
Afghanistan is over here.
for starters. Look.
And Russia's over here.
Nobody said it was easy. okay?
But it's our only chance at survival.
We'd hide in the trucks.
We ride in the trucks to Karaganda
and from there. head down to Afghanistan.
Exactly.
Well. we're going to need a compass.
And tobacco for the dogs.
Pablito stays.
We can go on a suicide mission.
but he's a kid. I won't allow that.
When. Lieutenant?
When the snow lets up.
Leaving before it thaws would be suicide.
We'll do it in spring.
Fucking sick of them.
Obey orders without question.
Resistance will be punished.
Stealing food will result in beatings
and the deprivation of food.
Storing explosives
is grounds for a severe punishment.
A breakout or an armed--
Don't move! Stay where you are.
What is this?
Chew it
and eat it.
I told you to eat it.
Here. Bon appétit.
Pablito. keep going with the lessons.
Okay.
Valencia?
Logroño. Pamplona. Santander. Murcia…
-Müller.
-Burgos. León…
Sorry.
Photographic memory.
I read things once
and they stay with me forever.
How lucky.
Artigas. What…
It's fine. man.
No.
Do you know the monarchs of Spain?
The monarchs?
Yes.
-Alfonso.
-XII.
-XII. Alfonso XII.
-And who else?
More?
Who else?
-Well…
-XIII.
Alfonso XIII.
Alfonso… XIV?
-Alfonso XV. XVI. XVII.
-Cut it out. He can't focus.
Take this seriously. Okay?
Really. Pablito. take this seriously.
It will be useful for you.
Useful for what?
For something.
When we get out of here. it'll be useful.
When I was 12. I worked
on a battery charger assembly line.
So?
-So?
-Yeah?
I've been through orphanages. the urkas.
The monarchs haven't done shit for me.
They won't do shit for you either.
-One day. you'll return.
-Return where?
-Well. home.
-Home? Where's my home. Father?!
-Hey!
-No. tell me.
Quiet!
Keep it down!
They're brainwashing him. Fucking hell.
Eladio. take it easy.
It's okay. He's an urka.
But he's a Red. for fuck's sake.
The Republic didn't pay for his education
so he could be an altar boy.
Do you find it normal?
We have to do something.
I think you've done enough already.
Number 321!
Come on. Father.
I know it was you who protected me
from the urkas in the infirmary.
Oraz is a blabbermouth.
Has he already given you
one of his speeches?
You have no idea.
You studied medicine
before the war. right?
For two years.
You'll need a job to regain your strength.
I know what you're doing. Reyes.
You want to prevent
revenge on the Asturian.
I want to stop this before it blows up.
You mean a truce?
A truce.
I've heard you draw very well.
I do.
Oraz is a blabbermouth.
-You can't go in there.
-Keep quiet.
-I said you can't.
-Stop yapping!
Get the hell out.
The urkas traffic in the saliva
of tuberculosis patients.
People will do anything
to avoid working in the mine.
Just let me pass through here.
I think you already know Aisulu.
-Your new boss.
-What do you mean. my boss?
First. wash the sick.
Then help in the supply room.
She'll need your help.
At least until the new doctor arrives.
One of the urkas died on his watch.
so they cut off his hands in retaliation.
But you can always go back to the mine.
Her husband was executed by firing squad.
Well. I hope it wasn't in Leningrad.
Arise. children of the Fatherland
The day of glory has arrived
Against us tyranny's
Bloody standard is raised
What is he saying?
That he's--
What?
He's sick of the Italian anthem.
the French anthem. and the Czech anthem.
He wants to hear the Spanish anthem.
Fuck.
I'm a Falangist
I'll be a Falangist until death or victory
And that's why
I'm at Spain's service with pleasure
Enlisted. I go with the youth
In a battle--
If priests and friars knew
They were going to get beaten
They would join the choir and sing
Freedom. freedom. freedom!
-I'm a Falangist
-Stop!
I'll be a Falangist until death or victory
-If priests and friars knew--
-Freedom. freedom. freedom!
What's he saying?
He wants only one Spanish anthem.
I feel within me
A sad emotion
I'm suffering. far away from you
And my heart is breaking
Never again
Will the sun bring me joy
In Spain's garden. my love
Like a flower. I will always remain
If this cry of my bitter sorrow
Reaches your feet on the wind
Spain. send it back to me with love
Spain. my beloved
I feel within me
A sad emotion
I'm suffering. far away from you
And my heart is breaking
Never again
Will the sun bring me joy
In Spain's garden. my love
Like a flower. I will always remain
If this cry of my bitter sorrow
Reaches your feet on the wind
Spain. send it back to me with love
Spain. my beloved
A concert?
A spring concert in the camp.
In seven weeks.
There may be more talent in this camp
than we thought. Chief.
Are you talking about
that urka with the violin?
There are more like him.
We'll find them. We'll create a work plan.
It won't distract us from the mine.
Forget about the mine.
We'll double your rations.
Bugoslav Levandovski.
Number 319.
The candidates are excused from the mine.
Holy shit.
What the fuck was this place before?
Do you know these holes
are like lookout points?
If you focus.
you can see the Noia estuary.
You mean the Muros estuary. smart-ass.
Look. What do you see?
Holy shit!
It's Cuco's boat!
Holy shit. Cuco!
There are sardines.
Cuco! Work. you bastard!
You just sit on your ass!
Cuco! Say hi!
Cu--
What's that?
It's a domra. our traditional instrument.
But it's missing strings. isn't it?
It doesn't need more strings.
-Anything to get out of having to work.
-Why?
"People from Noia are like a wooden bell."
"People from Muros are crazy fuckers."
You!
Stop that. kid. Those little hands
aren't needed here. Come on.
No. they are needed. okay?
Don't listen to him.
He's doing a good job.
Do you play any instruments?
Palau pounded a pin. Right?
-Come on. I don't have all day.
-Don't make me hit you.
They're like little sardines.
You fry them. They're delicious.
Oh. so good!
Father. what are you thinking?
You're so quiet. Huh?
He used to be surrounded by women.
-Really?
-No harm in talking. It's not a sin.
-What are you saying?
-Father is a real Casanova.
We'll do it during the concert.
While the guards are busy with the guests.
-We're going home. man.
-We're leaving.
No more mine.
-No more mine.
Nurse!
A cart fell on him.
Hang in there. brother.
Hang in there. Here you go.
You'll be okay.
Don't just stare at him! Do something!
Listen to me.
-If anything happens to him--
-He's not gonna die.
He is not going to die.
He has to live.
Out! Everyone out! Give us some space!
He's my brother.
If he dies. I'll cut your hands off!
Alcohol. Bring alcohol.
Alcohol…
Hey! What are you doing?
It's not enough.
It's okay.
Do you speak Kazakh?
Oraz.
Oraz. he… married me.
"Oraz is teaching me."
He's teaching me. Oraz is teaching me.
Thank you.
Faster! Come on! Get in!
-Come on. get in! Come on!
-Don't slow down!
-Faster! Don't stop! Come on!
-Get in. Don't stop.
-Get a move on.
-Come on!
-Get in!
-Get in.
You can only watch and listen.
Be quiet for a minute.
You know Carballo.
the guy from the garage?
Man. how could I not know him?
He was more powerful
than the mayor. Jesus.
Then you must know
Remedios too. his cousin.
Remedios. yes.
Remedios… I danced a lot with her.
-Oh. really?
-At the Muros fair. yes.
How do you know Remedios so well?
-Well…
-I'll go.
-From dancing with her. I guess.
-Ah.
I knew she was seeing a guy
from Muros who was a smuggler.
Oh. I don't know about that.
-You don't?
-People like to talk.
People talk a lot. yes.
Gentlemen. I just collected a debt.
-Who wants a taste?
-I do.
In German. we have a wonderful word
for remembering our homeland.
Heimweh.
-Heimweh?
-Ja.
Thanks.
It comes from heimat.
which means the place.
the city where your home is.
and weh. which means pain.
So it means
something like painful nostalgia.
The word doesn't exist
in any other language.
-Danke schön.
-Zum Wohl.
Hey. German.
Call it what you want.
but we just call that homesickness.
You got me there.
-Heimweh.
Goddamn.
Come on.
But do you have a wife
waiting for you at home?
Well. how the hell would I know?
I hope so.
I had a photo of her.
But I lost it in the war.
I don't know if I'm starting to…
Forget her?
Come with me.
-What?
-Let's go.
Her eyes. they're big. Yes. Big.
They're actually small.
Small and kind of slanted.
Um…
Okay.
Hey. Come on. Give it a try. Go on. Try.
What was her hair like?
What was her hair like? What color was it?
-It was black. Black.
-Black.
Black but almost closer to brown.
Because it looked lighter under the sun.
-But it…
-She had…
And what was it like? Wavy. straight?
Straight. It was straight.
Yeah. straight. And…
Straight and long.
And her face?
Her face was…
She had kind of a round face. you know?
Her face was round.
It was like a…
it was like a chestnut.
She had a pointy chin like this.
She had a tiny little nose.
Small. Very cute.
And when she laughed.
you could see her dimples.
Like this. one on each side.
It looked like her mouth
had parentheses on each side.
She laughed. She laughed a lot.
So much.
She was always laughing.
It's her.
Are we friends now?
We're working there.
"Working."
Hermida.
Hey. listen. The thing is…
You heard. right?
The Ivans are already in Berlin.
The English and the Americans
are there now.
The Nazis have lost.
so it's just a matter of time.
If I ever get back to Spain.
I know exactly what I'm going to do first.
Eat a Spanish omelet.
What about you?
They say Franco's offering amnesty
for anyone who wants to come back.
A clean-up act.
He just wants to keep them off his back
once the war is over.
I don't think anyone wants any more wars.
These aren't good times for the hopeful.
These aren't good times.
Here.
I have prepared a petition.
Signed in my own handwriting.
And you know what?
I'm positive that this time around…
No. I'm not just positive.
I'm absolutely sure…
that this time around…
they will sign off on your case file.
Thank you.
Oh. yes. By the way.
the news of the concert
has already spread throughout the camps.
Your men have done a tremendous job.
Cheers.
It's not just my men. Chief.
But when you're released from this camp.
those men will remain as your enemies.
Have you forgotten about that?
No.
My men have been noticing things.
Missing tobacco. Missing kitchenware.
Absences with no valid reason.
You know. I'm rather curious
about what's really going on here.
I'm no snitch.
Then who will you be loyal to?
A bunch of mercs.
Francoists.
friends of fascists. or. in the end…
to your own men?
Fuck.
SPRING 1945
THE DAY OF THE CONCERT
Good evening. Comrade Marshal.
I'm glad you made it too.
At ease.
Let's go inside. It's much warmer there.
The concert is about to start.
Please. Come inside.
Magnificent concert today.
Which. by the way.
we've prepared for several weeks for.
Found some wonderful people.
There will be singing today.
Greta will be on stage.
A domra performance today as well.
There'll be a violin. And a domra.
Have a seat. You'll be sitting here.
Have a seat.
There'll be some impressive singing. Now…
How about a drink after a long trip
to warm you up. No? A little…
And you?
Very well.
Here you go.
And if you don't mind.
I will sit here. close by.
Reyes.
What did Nazarov want?
He made me a proposal. That's all.
What is this?
Why do you have my letters?
I just found out.
Nazarov said it the day you met him.
The system…
does not make mistakes.
Reyes.
Four years.
Four damn years.
Captain…
And Father? Where is he?
He's not coming.
Come on. Let's go.
Wait. We're missing someone.
What do you mean. we're--
Hurry up. Hermida. hurry up. goddamn it.
What's he doing here?
He's coming with me.
-Did you know?
-Does it matter?
Let's go.
When's the guard relief?
We'll get to see the second part
if we're lucky.
With those blue eyes
As light as the sea
I get lost in their gaze
And I'm unable to escape
The magic of their smile
Will always make me sigh
When I look at their lips
My world starts to spin
I've never liked the opera.
I just don't get it.
Well. you're not a man of culture like me.
Did you see the prisoner girl.
by the way? I've heard better singing.
From here to Muros. my friend.
From here to Muros.
Arguments with no direction
Pride is vanity
Words that wound
Will this be the end?
And then comes the night
We just hold each other
We kiss
And love shines once again
With those blue eyes as light as the sea
I get lost in their gaze
And I'm unable to escape
Artigas.
Rub tobacco on yourself.
Take that truck.
Yeah. I'm on it.
Check this one.
I'm on it.
Come here.
I'll take this truck.
Hey! Stop! Hold on!
We have a corpse missing!
What's going on?
Hey!
I hope you enjoyed the concert.
Did you hear how good the violin was?
And what about the domra?
The domra was out of this world.
don't you think?
Let's invite him to dinner.
Tell you what. if you're ever in Moscow.
do come over for dinner.
We'll be glad to have you.
Comrade Nazarov.
Quick.
ONE MONTH LATER
Get up.
Come on.
You okay? Come on. let's go. Let's go.
Keep going.
Artigas squealed.
One of the Galicians didn't make it.
The other escaped.
Who?
I'm sorry.
Germany has surrendered!
The war is over!
MAY 8 - 1945
END OF THE WAR
-Let's go!
-Shoot!
-Hey! Watch out!
-Watch out! He's there!
Father!
Go for it!
Look!
Who wants it?
SUMMER 1947
Hey! Ref!
-Over here!
-Ref!
That's a foul!
Help!
Foul!
-Ref!
-Penalty!
Fuck!
-Get off!
-I'm getting off.
-Help!
-Come on. Get up.
I missed. The sun was in my eyes.
Goddamn it. Father.
Now the sun bothers you. huh?
Hey! Shut up! Come on. shoot!
Get it out of there!
Let's go!
-Palau!
-Eladio!
-Father. steal it!
-Goddamn it!
Greta!
No!
-Come on. shoot!
-Hit it!
Goal!
Palau!
Barcelonian. what are you doing?
-Goal! Let's go!
-Get off.
Miner! Goal!
Look.
More women leaving.
This camp's days are numbered.
We'll be the next ones.
-Did they say where they're taking you?
-Leningrad. Come find us.
-Here. Put this on. It's very cold there.
-Palau. she has to go.
Okay? Here. Stay warm.
What's his name going to be?
-I'm sorry. but they'll leave without her.
-Diego.
I love you. Diego.
-I love you both.
-We love you.
-Yes. run!
-Come on. Palau!
I'll score next time. I swear. Let's go.
The Kazakhs have invited us
for lunch at the kolkhoz
for helping them with the crops.
And?
Aisulu is going too.
So make the most of it.
I don't know how much longer
they'll let us leave the camp.
What camp?
There's only a few of us left here.
Don't go too far.
Artigas will cover for you.
I owe you one.
"One." he says.
What's wrong?
Your mind is far from here.
When we're out of here.
come with me.
This is the land of the Kazakhs. My land.
A flower without roots doesn't last long.
I have a land waiting for me too.
Keep it.
I'll come back for it.
It's stuffed with meat.
It can be lamb or veal.
And this is called baursaki.
It's like a Spanish churro.
The main course is here!
Friends. the lamb's head
is served to special.
distinguished. and respected guests.
Thank you.
Raqmet.
Oh. raqmet.
Raqmet means "thank you" in Kazakh.
-Raqmet.
-Thank you.
Let's eat.
It's delicious.
Anara wants to know
who you were before you ended up here.
I worked in a publishing house.
It was my father's. but he was executed.
It was the only thing left of my family.
Until they closed it down.
I was a cook in a hotel in Barcelona.
And I also liked to tell jokes. Yeah.
Anara is asking if you can tell us one.
-Of course.
-No!
-No. please don't.
-Do it!
He'd better not.
-That's a bad idea.
-Please don't.
So there's a kolkhoz. right?
Like this one.
And. suddenly.
that fucker Stalin appears. and…
I told you not to tell it.
I didn't tell the best part.
You didn't let me finish.
-You have no sense of humor. Seriously.
-If they were funny…
Why did they imprison you?
You never told us.
For thinking differently.
Whose side are you on?
None of them.
I don't have an ideology.
I have principles.
We Kazakhs never imagined this.
that the world would come here.
at the gates of our home.
but Allah wanted it this way.
We give thanks for that also.
We give thanks to Allah.
Thanks to Allah.
And to our Lord.
To whichever one
gets us out of here first.
Exactly.
Enjoy. We've suffered enough. Please.
Seven years without a meal.
Try some. Father.
Seriously?
Don't bother me with this anymore.
How do I tell my men?
No one will help us.
Neither Nazarov nor the Communist Party.
-What?
-What about the Blue Division?
Franco won't admit
he has prisoners in the Soviet Union.
-Not now?
-No. No prisoners of any kind.
And the party won't admit
they sent us here without a trial.
They're saying we're deserters.
Do they want us to rot here?
Ten. fifteen years? How much longer?
No fucking way. We can't let that happen.
Calm down.
Nazarov made us an offer.
Courtesy of the Soviet Union.
We join the revolution.
-What does that mean?
-We become Russian citizens.
Just what we needed.
Should we become communists too?
There are no communists left
in the Soviet Union.
Stalin has killed them all.
Then I can leave because I'm Russian.
Your case is different.
You're here for violent crimes.
And that's right. You're already Russian.
Okay. so what does all of this mean?
It means we'd work
in workshops and factories.
Well. we would be free.
But we would be Russians.
We couldn't go back to Spain.
What do you think about all this. Captain?
I promised to get you out of here.
Not that we'd change prisons.
Your list is very long.
All prisoners.
Republicans and Blue Division.
from here and other camps.
Both men and women.
The risk is too high.
There will be a second payment
when you get to Spain at this address.
"Clara St…" Is it your family?
Who cares who they are?
They'll pay very well for rescuing us.
Fucking hell.
Fine.
Can we trust that Nazi?
-Iván José González.
-No one blames you. buddy.
Thank you.
-Take care.
-You too.
Roland Durban.
Eladio.
I'm really sorry.
-Claude Gaspard.
-Palau.
We'll miss you.
Me too.
-Have a good trip.
-Thank you.
-See you.
-Giovani Busacca.
-Go with God.
-Good luck.
Hey! Barcelonian.
One last one.
How do you say "paratrooper" in Russian?
André Monicelli.
"Para-thud."
What? Bad joke?
Terrible.
Take care of your family.
I will.
Goodbye.
Luciano Craspelli.
Look how quickly
the fascist switched sides.
Melléin Palau.
Hey. private. Turn out his pockets.
They're searching them.
If they find Müller's list.
we're done for.
What's he doing?
-What is he doing?
-Hey! Get back in line!
I told you. Captain. I told you.
-In line!
-And he's still getting his money.
-He's giving them the list.
-What's he have there? Give me that.
Let me see.
That Nazi motherfucker
won't get away with this.
-Junqueras. stop.
-Müller!
Fascist piece of shit!
-Wait.
-I'll kill him! Get off me!
-Captain.
-Get off me!
Get off me! Motherfucker! Get off me!
Get off me! God fucking damn it!
-God fucking…
-Wait.
Guard!
Eladio!
Junqueras.
Are you hit?
Okay. you're fine.
Remember. Lord. that we are just dust.
And man is like grass
and the flower of the field that withers.
And…
and…
"With music strong I come.
with my cornets and my drums…
I play not marches
for accepted victors only."
"I play marches
for conquered and slain persons."
"Have you heard
that it was good to gain the day?"
"I also say it is good to fall."
"I beat and pound for the dead."
"Vivas to those who have failed."
"And to those whose war vessels sank.
And to those themselves who sank."
"And the numberless unknown heroes
equal to
the greatest heroes known."
MADRID
MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
Please. sir. It will just be a moment.
-Again? No. not again. Impossible.
-Excuse me. It's just…
What do you want? Can't you see I'm busy?
He's back. He's still there.
He says he won't leave until you see him.
-What does he want?
-I don't know.
Hey. no. You can't be here. No!
Okay. what do you want?
Do you know how to write?
-Yes. So what?
-Write this down. then.
Esperanza Moreno.
Antonio Castillo.
Antonio Barba Penas.
César Benítez Martínez.
Pablo Espinoza Gómez.
Abelino González.
Tomás Bernal Aroca.
Diego Salgado Jarque.
Manuel Fernández Collado.
Pablo Fernández Carrasco.
Eladio Taraño Junqueras.
Holy shit.
Telmo Reyes Anguera.
Francisco de Asís Moreno Santos.
Father.
I'm so happy.
You're going home.
Yes. We both deserved a good rest.
Don't you think?
Despite everything that happened.
it's been a pleasure to know you.
comrade.
See you never. Camp Chief.
I can already smell it.
What? The fabada?
My God.
What's a fabada?
-You don't know what fabada is?
-No.
Beans. bacon. chorizo…
It's the best thing in the world. Pablín.
Antonio Barba Penas.
Adelino González.
Captain.
-Lieutenant.
-Martín Marías.
I didn't think you'd stay.
I didn't think you'd leave.
Ángel Turión.
David Obeso.
José de la Torre.
Thank you.
-Have a good trip.
-Take care.
-Captain.
-Domingo Correa Martínez.
Are you sure?
Yes.
Diego Salgado.
This is my home now.
-Take care of everyone. okay?
-Thanks for everything. my friend.
Eladio Junqueras.
It's my turn.
Go on.
I'll keep you here. okay?
Pablito.
Take care of yourself.
-Pablo Fernández.
-Private!
This boy isn't going anywhere.
Strike him off the list.
Hey! What the hell are you doing?
-The boy…
-Captain.
The boy is a Soviet citizen.
like all the minors taken in at the camp.
-Captain. what's going on?
-Here are the papers. See for yourself.
Telmo.
I can't go back?
How lawful is this?
Lawful enough
to invalidate the extradition.
-Telmo…
-You son of a bitch.
Hey! Boy!
-No! I'll do it.
-Don't you dare let him on the bus.
Yes.
-Pablito.
-No. Leave me alone.
Leave me alone! I want to go back!
-Pablo!
-Leave me alone. please!
Pablo.
Learn the monarchs of Spain. Okay?
What? What are you talking about?
Get in.
Let's go. Come on. Pablito. Hurry up.
Drive.
Can you tell me what's going on here?
The bus is leaving.
I'm gonna drive to the next checkpoint.
show the documents there.
and take the boy with me. Got that?
These documents?
What the hell do you think you're doing?!
Guard!
Take him out.
MADRID 1982
400 pesetas exactly.
First time in Spain?
They will have in their hands
the power to be consulted
on whether they want to belong
to a military bloc.
No to NATO! No military bases!
We don't want any of the military blocs.
Yankees out!
Good afternoon. Lieutenant.
I'm Reyes.
Captain Telmo Reyes.
She…
she kept it all her life.
And she wanted you to have it.
Captain.
Lieutenant.
Remember what Oraz used to say?
"There is no man freer
than he who has been imprisoned."
TO MY MOTHER
THANK YOU FOR EVERYTHING
THE TRUCE